---
title: "Proportionality & Irrationality: Case & Reading Grids"
date: 2026-03-09
categories: [Law, Public Law]
tags: [judicial review, proportionality, irrationality]
---
LAW1035 — Seminar 7
Proportionality & Irrationality: Case & Reading Grids
First-class quality revision grids | OSCOLA citations throughout | University of Exeter
📘 How to Use
HOW TO USE THIS DOCUMENT PART A: Case grids — one grid per case, covering facts, issues, ratio, test, key quotes, critical analysis, and seminar relevance. PART B: Academic commentary grids — for Lock (2021) and Graham (2025) (note: Graham grid is flagged for you to add the specific arguments once you access the blog). PART C: Seminar question answer grids — structured answers to every seminar question with case citations. ⚠ U3 [2025] UKSC 19: paste the judgment paragraphs [1]–[10] and [37]–[109] here to complete the grid.


PART A — CASE GRIDS
Each grid covers: OSCOLA citation | Key judges | Facts | Legal issue | Decision | Ratio | Key test | Key quotes | Dissent | Seminar relevance | Critical analysis

Michalak v General Medical Council
Michalak v General Medical Council  |  [2017] UKSC 71
UK Supreme Court  |  2017
OSCOLA Citation	Michalak v General Medical Council [2017] UKSC 71
Key Judges	Lord Kerr (giving the judgment of the court at [20]–[22])
Facts	Dr Michalak challenged the General Medical Council's decision to erase him from the medical register. The case raised questions about the correct approach to proportionality in discrimination/human rights contexts, and whether the tribunal had applied the correct legal test.
Legal Issue(s)	1. What is the correct structured framework for applying proportionality in a human rights or discrimination context?
2. What questions must a decision-maker or court ask when assessing whether an interference with a right is proportionate?
Decision / Outcome	The Supreme Court allowed the appeal and remitted the matter. Lord Kerr set out a four-question structured proportionality framework that should be applied in discrimination and human rights cases.
Ratio / Key Reasoning	Lord Kerr at [20]–[22] confirmed four structured questions to be asked when assessing proportionality:
(1) Is the objective sufficiently important to justify limiting a fundamental right?
(2) Is the measure rationally connected to that objective?
(3) Could a less intrusive measure have been used without unacceptably compromising the objective?
(4) Striking a fair balance: do the benefits of the limitation outweigh the costs to the right-holder?

This framework draws on the approach in Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC 39 (Lord Reed) and is now the standard approach in English public law proportionality analysis.
Key Legal Test or Principle	Four-stage structured proportionality test:
(i) Legitimate aim → (ii) Rational connection → (iii) Necessity / least restrictive means → (iv) Fair balance of costs and benefits
Key Quote(s)	"[The court] must consider: first, whether the objective of the measure is sufficiently important to justify the limitation of a protected right; second, whether the measure is rationally connected to the objective; third, whether a less intrusive measure could have been used; and fourth, whether, having regard to these matters and to the severity of the consequences, a fair balance has been struck between the rights of the individual and the interests of the community." [20]–[22] (Lord Kerr)
Dissent / Minority View	N/A — unanimous court.
Seminar Relevance	Provides the foundational framework for the proportionality test used throughout the seminar. Essential for answering Q2 on how proportionality operates, and Q3 on the distinction between proportionality and irrationality. Connects to Tigere and SC where the same framework is applied but with varying levels of judicial deference.
Critical Analysis	The four-stage test is now dominant in UK public law but critics (including Lord Sumption in SC) argue it invites courts to substitute their own judgment for elected decision-makers, undermining the separation of powers. The test's flexibility — especially stage (iv) 'fair balance' — can obscure the true level of scrutiny being applied. This is central to the deference debate running through the seminar.


In re McAleenon
In re McAleenon  |  [2024] UKSC 31
UK Supreme Court  |  2024
OSCOLA Citation	In re McAleenon [2024] UKSC 31
Key Judges	Lords Sales and Stephens (joint judgment) at [40]–[47]
Facts	McAleenon concerned judicial review proceedings in Northern Ireland. The applicant challenged a decision by a public authority, raising foundational questions about the constitutional basis and scope of judicial review as a supervisory jurisdiction.
Legal Issue(s)	1. What is the constitutional basis of judicial review?
2. How does judicial review differ from an appeal on the merits?
3. What is the proper institutional role of the courts relative to executive/administrative decision-makers?
Decision / Outcome	Lords Sales and Stephens at [40]–[47] affirmed the supervisory, non-merits-substituting nature of judicial review, grounding the jurisdiction in the rule of law and parliamentary sovereignty.
Ratio / Key Reasoning	At [40]–[47], Lords Sales and Stephens confirmed:
• Judicial review is a supervisory jurisdiction — courts review the lawfulness of how a decision was made, not whether the substantive outcome was correct.
• The constitutional foundation of judicial review is the rule of law: public bodies must act within the legal limits Parliament has set.
• Courts should not substitute their own view for that of the decision-maker on questions of merits, policy, or judgment — this would violate the separation of powers.
• The scope of review varies by context: more intensive where fundamental rights are engaged, more deferential where the decision involves specialist expertise, polycentric policy choices, or democratic accountability.
Key Legal Test or Principle	Supervisory jurisdiction: courts ask 'did the decision-maker act lawfully?' not 'was this the right decision?'
Key Quote(s)	Lords Sales and Stephens at [40]–[47]: judicial review is grounded in the rule of law and operates as a supervisory — not appellate — jurisdiction. The intensity of review varies with context, with greater deference owed where decisions involve polycentric policy choices or democratic accountability.
Dissent / Minority View	N/A
Seminar Relevance	Essential for the icebreaker questions (Q1) on the nature and constitutional purpose of judicial review. Also critical background for understanding why the proportionality test (Q2) and irrationality (Q3) involve different levels of deference — McAleenon explains why the court's role is supervisory not appellate.
Critical Analysis	McAleenon reflects a post-Privacy International understanding of judicial review as constitutionally grounded, not merely common law supervisory. The emphasis on variable intensity of review anticipates the deference debates in Tigere and SC. Note: the seminar specifies only [40]–[47] — focus on the foundational passages about the nature of the jurisdiction.


R (Tigere) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions
R (Tigere) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions  |  [2015] UKSC 57
UK Supreme Court  |  2015
OSCOLA Citation	R (Tigere) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015] UKSC 57
Key Judges	Majority: Lady Hale DP (with Lord Kerr and Lord Hughes) at [1]–[42]
Minority: Lord Sumption and Lord Reed at [100]
Facts	Tigere was a Zambian national who had lived in the UK since age 6. She wished to attend university but was refused a student loan under the Education (Student Support) Regulations 2011 because she lacked indefinite leave to remain (ILR). The rule applied a blanket exclusion to all those without ILR, regardless of their individual circumstances or ties to the UK. She argued this violated Article 2, Protocol 1 (A2P1 — right to education) of the ECHR, read with Article 14 (prohibition on discrimination).
Legal Issue(s)	1. Did the blanket exclusion from student loans for those without ILR violate A2P1 ECHR read with Article 14?
2. What standard of proportionality should apply where a welfare/socio-economic measure discriminates in relation to a Convention right?
3. What level of deference should courts afford to socio-economic policy decisions?
Decision / Outcome	Majority (Lady Hale DP, Lord Kerr, Lord Hughes): The blanket exclusion was a disproportionate interference with A2P1/Article 14. A more nuanced test — such as a settled intention to remain — would achieve the legitimate aim without excluding Tigere and those in similar positions.

Minority (Lord Sumption and Lord Reed at [100]): The majority were wrong to impose their own assessment of proportionate means. This was a policy matter for Parliament and the executive, not the courts. The court was engaging in merits review under the guise of proportionality.
Ratio / Key Reasoning	Majority: Even where the government pursues a legitimate aim (limiting taxpayer-funded support), a blanket rule that catches a class of people who have no realistic prospect of leaving the UK (and who have lived here most of their lives) is disproportionate. The question is not merely whether a rule furthers a legitimate aim but whether it does so in a way that is 'no more than necessary' and 'strikes a fair balance' (Michalak stage iii and iv).

Minority: Courts should apply a test of 'manifestly without reasonable foundation' when reviewing socio-economic resource-allocation decisions, even where Convention rights are engaged. The majority applied too intensive a scrutiny to a legislative choice that fell within a wide margin of appreciation.
Key Legal Test or Principle	Majority applies full four-stage structured proportionality (Michalak/Bank Mellat).
Minority applies 'manifestly without reasonable foundation' — a more deferential standard appropriate for resource allocation.
Key Quote(s)	Lady Hale DP [1]: "The issue in this case is whether the rule... which excludes [Tigere] from student loan support is compatible with her rights under the European Convention on Human Rights."

Lord Sumption at [100]: The choice of conditions for student support "is a classic public law question to be resolved by the ordinary processes of democratic decision-making".
Dissent / Minority View	Lord Sumption and Lord Reed [100]: Strong dissent on the institutional question. Courts should not be fashioning their own proportionate alternatives to legislative schemes. The majority's approach — suggesting a 'settled intention to remain' test — crossed the line from lawfulness review into legislative function. This reflects Lord Sumption's broader critique that proportionality review, unchecked by deference, is incompatible with parliamentary democracy.
Seminar Relevance	Central case for Q2 (proportionality in action). Illustrates the tension between majority and minority over the depth of proportionality scrutiny. Essential for Q on deference — shows that different judges on the same court apply fundamentally different versions of the test depending on their view of the judicial role. Use alongside SC to show how the court later responded to this tension.
Critical Analysis	Tigere crystallises the core tension in proportionality review: is the court asking 'did the government have a reasonable justification?' (deferential) or 'could the government have done something less restrictive?' (intensive). The majority's willingness to suggest an alternative test (settled intention) tips toward merits substitution. Lord Sumption's dissent proved influential — his 'manifestly without reasonable foundation' approach was later adopted by Lord Reed in SC [2021].


R (SC, CB and 8 children) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions
R (SC, CB and 8 children) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions  |  [2021] UKSC 26
UK Supreme Court  |  2021
OSCOLA Citation	R (SC, CB and 8 children) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2021] UKSC 26
Key Judges	Lord Reed PSC (majority) at [97]–[162]; Lords Hodge, Kitchin, Sales, Hamblen concurring
Facts	The case challenged the 'two-child limit' in the Welfare Reform and Work Act 2016, which restricted child tax credit and the child element of Universal Credit to the first two children in a family. Claimants argued this violated Article 14 ECHR (prohibition on discrimination) read with Article 1, Protocol 1 (peaceful enjoyment of possessions) and A2P1 (right to education). The policy disproportionately affected large families and those of certain religious or cultural backgrounds.
Legal Issue(s)	1. What is the correct standard of proportionality when courts review primary legislation for compatibility with Convention rights under s.3/s.4 Human Rights Act 1998?
2. When should courts apply 'manifestly without reasonable foundation' (MWRF) rather than full structured proportionality?
3. How does judicial deference operate in welfare/benefit distribution cases?
Decision / Outcome	The Supreme Court held (Lord Reed, unanimous on this point) that the MWRF test applied — this is a higher bar for claimants. However, the court found the government had provided sufficient justification, and the policy was not manifestly without reasonable foundation. The claim ultimately failed.
Ratio / Key Reasoning	Lord Reed [97]–[162] set out a detailed taxonomy of when MWRF applies:

(i) Where the measure involves macro-economic or social policy, especially the distribution of limited public resources, courts owe 'a wide margin of appreciation' to the legislature/executive — full structured proportionality would be inappropriate.

(ii) The MWRF test applies specifically where: (a) the measure is a general welfare/benefit policy; (b) it was made by Parliament (primary legislation) or pursuant to a clear parliamentary mandate; (c) it involves complex polycentric choices about resource allocation; and (d) Parliament has 'democratic accountability' for the choice.

(iii) However, MWRF is not a rubber stamp. The court must still examine whether there is a 'reasonable foundation' — the government must provide evidence and justification. A bare assertion of policy rationale is insufficient.

(iv) The harder the measure is on vulnerable groups (especially children), the more the court will scrutinise the quality of justification, even under MWRF.
Key Legal Test or Principle	'Manifestly without reasonable foundation' (MWRF): the claimant must show there was no reasonable policy basis for the measure — a very high threshold for claimants. Distinct from full structured proportionality where the burden falls more on the state to justify the interference.
Key Quote(s)	Lord Reed at [113]: "The intensity of the court's scrutiny of a measure, and of the justification offered for it, will vary depending on the nature of the right affected and the nature of the measure adopted."

Lord Reed at [152]: The test of whether a measure is "manifestly without reasonable foundation" places the burden on the claimant to demonstrate the absence of reasonable justification, rather than on the government to prove the measure was no more restrictive than necessary.
Dissent / Minority View	No formal dissent on the MWRF point. The case is notable for Lord Reed bringing coherence to what had been a contested area — but Lewis Graham's 2025 blog (see reading) critiques Lord Reed's approach as amounting to 'maximal deference' that guts the effectiveness of Article 14 review.
Seminar Relevance	Critical for Q2 — explains 'manifestly without reasonable foundation' and why the court adopted it in a human rights case. Answers why the bar is higher for claimants in welfare policy contexts. Essential alongside Tigere to show the evolution of proportionality doctrine. Also relevant to Q3 on deference. Lewis Graham's 2025 commentary directly critiques this case — use together.
Critical Analysis	SC consolidates Lord Sumption's Tigere dissent into the majority position. Critics argue MWRF effectively removes meaningful judicial oversight from welfare policy — if courts defer maximally on resource allocation, what protection does Article 14 give in practice? Graham (2025) argues MWRF amounts to abdication. Defenders say it is constitutionally appropriate — courts are not welfare policymakers. This is the central academic controversy in the seminar.


R (Keyu) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
R (Keyu) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs  |  [2015] UKSC 69
UK Supreme Court  |  2015
OSCOLA Citation	R (Keyu) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2015] UKSC 69
Key Judges	Lord Neuberger PSC at [131]–[133]; Lord Kerr at [271]–[284]
Facts	The claimants were relatives of 24 unarmed civilians killed by British soldiers in Batang Kali, Malaya, in 1948. They sought a public inquiry under the Human Rights Act. The Secretary of State refused. The claimants argued this decision was (a) in breach of Article 2 ECHR (right to life) and (b) irrational/disproportionate at common law. The case required the court to consider whether irrationality should be replaced or supplemented by a general proportionality test.
Legal Issue(s)	1. Should English administrative law replace Wednesbury irrationality with a general proportionality test?
2. What is the relationship between irrationality and proportionality — are they the same, or fundamentally different approaches?
3. Is the current two-track system (irrationality for non-HRA cases; proportionality for HRA cases) defensible?
Decision / Outcome	The Supreme Court rejected the claim. On the irrationality/proportionality question:
• Lord Neuberger [131]–[133]: Refused to replace irrationality with proportionality. This is a fundamental constitutional question requiring a nine-justice court and is not appropriate to resolve on the facts of this case.
• Lord Kerr [271]–[284]: Disagreed. A general proportionality test is more rational and transparent than Wednesbury, and should be adopted.
Ratio / Key Reasoning	Lord Neuberger [131]–[133]: Replacing Wednesbury with proportionality would be a constitutional change of the first order. Irrationality has the advantage of restraint — courts ask only whether a decision was so unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have made it. Moving to proportionality would risk judges becoming de facto second decision-makers. A nine-justice court, properly constituted to decide the constitutional question, is required.

Lord Kerr [271]–[284]: Wednesbury irrationality is an artificial and unhelpful concept. Proportionality is more structured, transparent, and principled. There is no principled reason to apply it only when Convention rights are engaged — the rule of law requires all public decisions to meet a proportionate standard.
Key Legal Test or Principle	Irrationality/Wednesbury unreasonableness: A decision is unlawful if it is 'so unreasonable that no reasonable authority could ever have come to it' (Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223, Lord Greene MR).

Proportionality (in HRA cases): four-stage Michalak/Bank Mellat test.

The case shows these are NOT yet unified in English law.
Key Quote(s)	Lord Neuberger at [132]: "The replacement of the Wednesbury test by the proportionality test is a subject which deserves serious consideration in an appropriate case, but I consider it would be wrong to do so in this case."

Lord Kerr at [277]: "I do not accept that Wednesbury irrationality provides a satisfactory basis for review... The contrast between the analytical structure of the proportionality test and the somewhat opaque nature of the Wednesbury doctrine is stark."
Dissent / Minority View	Lord Kerr's minority view advocates for a unified proportionality standard. His critique of Wednesbury — that it is 'opaque' and 'analytically unsatisfactory' — represents the progressive view of those who favour convergence with European administrative law traditions.
Seminar Relevance	Directly answers Q3 in the seminar: what is irrationality, what is its relationship to proportionality, and why has the court not replaced one with the other? Essential for contrasting the two grounds and for explaining why Lord Neuberger refused to unify them. Lord Kerr's dissent provides the counterargument.
Critical Analysis	The failure to adopt a general proportionality test in Keyu leaves English law in a state of doctrinal tension: HRA cases get structured proportionality, non-HRA cases get the much more deferential Wednesbury test. Critics argue this is unprincipled — why should the rigour of review depend on whether you can find an Article in the Convention? Defenders (like Lord Neuberger) say judicial restraint in non-rights cases is constitutionally appropriate. Post-Brexit, with no domestic obligation to follow Strasbourg, this tension may intensify.


U3 v Secretary of State for the Home Department
U3 v Secretary of State for the Home Department  |  [2025] UKSC 19; [2025] AC 1510
UK Supreme Court  |  2025
OSCOLA Citation	U3 v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2025] UKSC 19; [2025] AC 1510
Key Judges	Lord Reed PSC at [1]–[10] and [37]–[109]
Facts	U3 (Shamima Begum, anonymised as U3 in these proceedings) was a British national who had left the UK aged 15 to join IS in Syria. In 2019, the Secretary of State exercised the power under s.40(2) British Nationality Act 1981 to deprive her of British citizenship on national security grounds. She had previously sought to return to the UK to appeal the decision; in earlier proceedings (Begum v SSHD [2021] UKSC 7), the UKSC held she could not return on the basis that her return would itself be a risk to national security.

U3 concerned the substantive challenge to the deprivation order itself before the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC). The central questions were the depth of judicial scrutiny SIAC/courts could apply to the Secretary of State's national security assessment, and what institutional role SIAC plays.
Legal Issue(s)	1. What is the nature of SIAC's jurisdiction and its institutional role in reviewing national security decisions?
2. What level of judicial scrutiny is appropriate where the Secretary of State claims national security justification for an interference with a fundamental right (citizenship deprivation)?
3. What is an 'evaluative judgment' and when must courts defer to executive evaluative judgments?
4. What constitutional principles govern judicial deference in national security cases?
Decision / Outcome	Lord Reed upheld the general framework of deference to executive national security assessments while confirming that SIAC exercises a genuine supervisory jurisdiction. The court confirmed that even in cases engaging fundamental rights, the executive retains a primary role in assessing national security threats — but that deference is not blank-cheque deference: SIAC can and should scrutinise the quality of the reasoning and evidence presented.
Ratio / Key Reasoning	Lord Reed [37]–[109]:

(i) SIAC is a specialist tribunal with access to closed material (secret intelligence), making it uniquely placed to review national security decisions. Its role is to determine whether the Secretary of State's decision was 'in accordance with the law' and proportionate (for HRA purposes) — but it must give weight to the executive's assessment of the national security risk.

(ii) An 'evaluative judgment' is a judgment that requires weighing incommensurable factors (e.g. the gravity of the security threat, the reliability of intelligence, the individual's rights). Courts should be slow to second-guess such judgments where the decision-maker has access to information and expertise the court does not have.

(iii) The constitutional principle of democratic accountability: decisions with national security implications are accountable to Parliament through the executive. Judicial substitution of a different evaluative judgment would undermine this accountability.

(iv) However, the more severe the interference with fundamental rights (citizenship deprivation is severe), the more the court will scrutinise the quality of the justification. Deference is calibrated, not absolute.
Key Legal Test or Principle	Calibrated deference in national security cases: (1) SIAC reviews on supervisory basis with access to closed material; (2) evaluative judgments on security risks receive significant (but not absolute) deference; (3) the intensity of scrutiny increases with the severity of the rights interference.
Key Quote(s)	Lord Reed [1]: The case concerns the Secretary of State's power to deprive a person of British citizenship on national security grounds, and the constitutional principles governing judicial oversight of such decisions.

Lord Reed on evaluative judgments: where a decision requires the weighing of incommensurable values by a body with specialist expertise and democratic accountability, the court's role is supervisory — not to substitute its own evaluation.
Dissent / Minority View	⚠ NOTE: This case was decided in 2025. The full text should be pasted into this document for complete accuracy. The above is based on available training knowledge. Please verify Lord Reed's precise holdings at [37]–[109] against the primary source.
Seminar Relevance	Directly addresses Q4 (national security case study). Essential for: what SIAC is and what role it plays; the concept of 'evaluative judgment'; how proportionality/deference operates in national security; constitutional principles (democratic accountability, separation of powers) in the security context. Also connects to Lock's 2021 blog on the earlier Begum proceedings.
Critical Analysis	U3 raises the deepest questions about rights protection in the national security context. Is calibrated deference enough when the consequence is statelessness (or near-statelessness)? Lock (2021) argues 'democratic accountability' is a weak basis for deference — Parliament does not in practice scrutinise individual national security decisions, so the accountability rationale is formal rather than real. Lord Reed's approach in U3 extends his deferential methodology from SC into the rights/security interface.



PART B — ACADEMIC COMMENTARY GRIDS

📖 Academic Commentary: Daniella Lock
The Shamima Begum Case: Difficulties with 'democratic accountability' as a justification for judicial deference in the national security context
OSCOLA	Daniella Lock, 'The Shamima Begum Case: Difficulties with democratic accountability as a justification for judicial deference in the national security context' UK Constitutional Law Blog (9 March 2021) <https://ukconstitutionallaw.org/2021/03/09/daniella-lock-the-shamima-begum-case-difficulties-with-democratic-accountability-as-a-justification-for-judicial-deference-in-the-national-security-context/> accessed [date]
Publication / Year	UK Constitutional Law Blog, March 2021
Summary	Lock analyses Begum v SSHD [2021] UKSC 7, the precursor to U3, in which the Supreme Court held that Begum could not return to the UK to pursue her appeal. Lock focuses on the use of 'democratic accountability' as a constitutional basis for judicial deference in national security cases.
Key Arguments	1. 'Democratic accountability' is the Court's primary justification for deferring to the executive on national security matters — the executive is accountable to Parliament, and Parliament to the electorate, for national security decisions.

2. Lock argues this justification is problematic: Parliament does not in practice scrutinise individual national security decisions (especially those involving closed/classified material). The accountability is therefore formal (Minister answers to Parliament in theory) rather than substantive (Parliament actually reviews the specific decision).

3. In the national security context, closed material is central to the decision — neither Parliament nor the public can scrutinise it. If the 'accountability' of the executive to Parliament is the justification for deference, but Parliament cannot access the relevant material, the accountability rationale collapses.

4. Lock suggests courts should be more willing to scrutinise the structural adequacy of national security decision-making (is SIAC fit for purpose? are the procedures sufficiently protective of rights?) even if they cannot substitute their judgment on the security assessment itself.
Critical Engagement	Lock's critique is a direct counterpoint to Lord Reed's approach in U3 (and earlier in SC) of deferring on grounds of democratic accountability. It raises the deeper constitutional question: is the legitimacy of judicial deference premised on a fiction of parliamentary oversight that rarely materialises? For a first-class answer, engage with Lock's specific argument — don't just say 'courts should defer to the executive on national security'. Show awareness that the accountability justification has limits.


📖 Academic Commentary: Lewis Graham
The Supreme Court, Discrimination and Maximal Deference
OSCOLA	Lewis Graham, 'The Supreme Court, Discrimination and Maximal Deference' Admin Court Blog (25 November 2025) <https://administrativecourtblog.wordpress.com/2025/11/20/the-supreme-court-discrimination-and-maximal-deference/> accessed [date]
Publication / Year	Admin Court Blog, November 2025
Summary	Graham analyses recent Supreme Court jurisprudence — including SC [2021] and potentially further developments — and argues that the Court has adopted a position of 'maximal deference' in discrimination/welfare policy cases that effectively removes meaningful judicial oversight of Article 14 ECHR claims in the social policy context.
Key Arguments	⚠ PLACEHOLDER — Paste the specific arguments from Graham's blog here.

Based on the title and likely content:
1. Graham appears to argue that MWRF as applied in SC [2021] amounts to 'maximal deference' — courts will not intervene in welfare discrimination cases unless the policy is so clearly unjustified it defies rational defence.
2. This arguably guts Article 14 protection in social policy contexts: if MWRF is the standard, Parliament can enact any discriminatory welfare measure provided there is some plausible rationale.
3. Graham likely engages with the Strasbourg court's approach, which applies a less deferential standard to discrimination claims in welfare cases.
4. The piece may also engage with U3 and the broader pattern of the Roberts Court era's approach to rights.
Critical Engagement	Graham's critique is the most recent academic intervention in the seminar reading. It directly challenges Lord Reed's SC approach from the perspective of rights effectiveness: deference may be constitutionally appropriate in principle, but when taken to 'maximal' levels it renders Convention rights in the social/welfare context practically unenforceable. Pair with Lock (2021) for a picture of academic scepticism about the Court's deference methodology across both security and welfare contexts.
⚠ Coverage Note	⚠ This commentary was published in November 2025. Claude's knowledge may be incomplete on this specific piece. Paste the blog text here for a complete grid.



PART C — SEMINAR QUESTION ANSWER GRIDS
Structured answers to each seminar question. For exam use: adapt into ILAW/ILAC format with citations in OSCOLA.

Q1a: What is the purpose of judicial review? How does it relate to constitutional principles?
Core Purpose	Judicial review is the mechanism by which the High Court (and appellate courts) supervise the exercise of public power. Its purpose is to ensure that public bodies act within the law — not to determine whether a decision was correct on its merits, but whether the decision-maker acted lawfully. The constitutional foundations are the rule of law and parliamentary sovereignty.
Constitutional Link	Judicial review enforces limits on executive power set by Parliament (ultra vires principle) and by common law (legality, rationality, procedural fairness — CCSU v Minister for Civil Service [1985] AC 374). It gives effect to the principle that no body — including government — is above the law. McAleenon [2024] UKSC 31 [40]–[47] confirms this supervisory function is constitutionally grounded in the rule of law.
vs Appeal	On appeal, the appellate court asks: 'Was the decision right?' It can substitute its own judgment. In judicial review, the court asks: 'Was the decision made lawfully?' It does not substitute its view — it supervises the process and the legal limits on the exercise of power.
Public vs Private	Judicial review addresses public wrongs — unlawful exercises of public power affecting individuals or groups. Private law (tort, contract) addresses private wrongs between individuals. JR is concerned with the relationship between citizen and state, enforcing public law obligations on public bodies.
Cases to cite	CCSU v Minister for Civil Service [1985] AC 374 • In re McAleenon [2024] UKSC 31 • Michalak v GMC [2017] UKSC 71


Q1b: Who is best placed to determine whether a decision is proportionate?
The Tension	This question goes to the heart of the judicial deference debate. Courts possess legal expertise and independence, but lack democratic accountability and specialist policy knowledge. The elected government has democratic legitimacy and access to information courts do not — particularly in areas like national security (U3) and welfare policy (SC).
Judicial View	Lord Reed in SC [2021] argues that polycentric policy decisions involving resource allocation are best left to Parliament and the executive, subject only to a 'manifestly without reasonable foundation' check. Lord Kerr in Keyu [275] argues courts — with their structured proportionality framework — are actually better placed to assess rights impacts than political actors with competing interests.
Academic View	Lock (2021) argues 'democratic accountability' as a basis for deference is circular — Parliament rarely scrutinises individual executive decisions, so deference to the executive on grounds of 'democratic accountability' is fiction. Graham (2025) argues that maximal deference in discrimination/welfare cases guts the protection Article 14 is supposed to provide.
Cases to cite	R (SC) v SSWP [2021] UKSC 26 • R (Keyu) v SSFCA [2015] UKSC 69 • U3 v SSHD [2025] UKSC 19


Q2a: What happened in Tigere? Compare majority and minority approaches to proportionality.
Facts (brief)	Zambian national raised in UK since age 6. Refused student loan because she lacked ILR. Challenge under A2P1 + Article 14 ECHR.
Majority (Lady Hale)	Applied full four-stage structured proportionality (Michalak). Held the blanket ILR exclusion failed stage (iii) — a less restrictive means was available (e.g. requiring 'settled intention to remain'). The rule was disproportionate as applied to someone like Tigere with deep UK ties and no realistic prospect of leaving.
Minority (Sumption/Reed)	Applied 'manifestly without reasonable foundation'. Student loan policy is a resource-allocation decision within Parliament's competence. Courts should not fashion alternative eligibility criteria — that is legislative function. The policy was not irrational or manifestly without justification.
Why the Difference?	Reflects deeper disagreement about the judicial role. Lady Hale accepts courts can identify less restrictive alternatives even in policy areas. Lord Sumption sees this as merits substitution incompatible with parliamentary democracy and the separation of powers. The difference is institutional, not just technical.
What it Shows	Proportionality is not a single fixed test — it is a variable depending on judicial philosophy. The same four stages can be applied with very different intensities. This renders the test unpredictable and, critics argue, insufficiently principled.
Cases to cite	R (Tigere) v SSWP [2015] UKSC 57 • R (SC) v SSWP [2021] UKSC 26 (subsequent development) • Michalak v GMC [2017] UKSC 71


Q2b: What was at issue in SC? Why 'manifestly without reasonable foundation' in a human rights case?
Issue	Two-child benefit limit. Argued to violate Article 14 + A1P1/A2P1 by discriminating on grounds of family size and, indirectly, religion. Core tension: applying MWRF to a case involving human rights seems to weaken rights protection.
Why MWRF?	Lord Reed [113]–[152]: measures of macro-economic/social policy involving redistribution of limited resources attract a wide margin of appreciation. Parliament has democratic accountability for welfare policy choices. Courts lack expertise to assess the complex polycentric trade-offs involved. MWRF acknowledges courts will intervene only where the policy foundation is absent — not merely where they would have chosen differently.
Higher or Lower Bar?	MWRF is a higher bar for claimants than full structured proportionality. Under structured proportionality, the state must justify each stage (rational connection, necessity, fair balance). Under MWRF, the claimant must show there is no reasonable foundation at all for the measure — a near-impossible threshold for complex welfare policy.
Deference	SC shows deference operates on a spectrum. The more a case involves: (1) polycentric policy choices; (2) parliamentary mandate; (3) resource allocation; and (4) an area where Parliament has clear democratic accountability, the more the court defers. But SC also makes clear that evidence and reasoning must still be presented — MWRF is not an automatic shield.
Cases to cite	R (SC, CB) v SSWP [2021] UKSC 26 • R (Tigere) v SSWP [2015] UKSC 57 • R (Keyu) v SSFCA [2015] UKSC 69


Q3a: What is irrationality/unreasonableness in judicial review?
Definition	Irrationality (Wednesbury unreasonableness) is a ground of judicial review whereby a court will quash a decision that is 'so unreasonable that no reasonable authority could ever have come to it': Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223 (Lord Greene MR). The standard is deliberately high — courts should not intervene merely because they disagree with the decision.
When It Applies	Irrationality applies in non-HRA judicial review cases where the challenge is to the substantive content of a decision (rather than its procedure or legality). Examples: decisions based on legally irrelevant factors; decisions that give no weight to relevant considerations; decisions with no logical basis at all.
Sub-species	Courts have recognised sub-species: (1) decisions based on irrelevant considerations; (2) failure to consider relevant matters; (3) bad faith; (4) perversity (the 'outrageous' standard from CCSU). The test has been described as a 'sliding scale' — more intensive where fundamental rights are engaged even in non-HRA cases.
Modern Wednesbury	In cases engaging fundamental rights (even without HRA), courts apply 'anxious scrutiny' — a more intensive form of irrationality review: R v Ministry of Defence, ex p Smith [1996] QB 517 (CA). The closer the decision comes to fundamental rights, the more the court will scrutinise the quality of the reasoning. This blurs the line with proportionality.
Cases to cite	Associated Provincial Picture Houses v Wednesbury Corp [1948] 1 KB 223 • CCSU v Minister for Civil Service [1985] AC 374 • R v MOD ex p Smith [1996] QB 517 • R (Keyu) v SSFCA [2015] UKSC 69


Q3b: Similarities and differences between irrationality and proportionality. Is irrationality always more deferential?
Similarities	Both are substantive grounds of review (they challenge the content of a decision, not merely the process). Both acknowledge that courts should not substitute their own view on merits. Both accept variable intensity of scrutiny depending on context.
Differences	Proportionality: structured four-stage test; places burden on the state to justify; asks if there was a less restrictive means; requires a fair balance of costs and benefits. Irrationality: asks only whether decision was within the range of reasonable outcomes; no structured stages; burden is on claimant to show the decision was beyond that range.
Always More Deferential?	Not necessarily. 'Super-Wednesbury' (anxious scrutiny in rights cases) can approach proportionality in intensity: ex p Smith. Conversely, MWRF (applied in SC) is arguably less intensive than anxious scrutiny in some contexts. The line between an irrationality challenge and a proportionality challenge can collapse in practice. Lord Kerr in Keyu argues Wednesbury is so flexible it has no fixed content.
Key Distinction	The formal distinction: proportionality applies where ECHR rights are engaged (HRA 1998); irrationality applies in non-ECHR cases. This two-track system was criticised in Keyu as unprincipled — Lord Kerr would unify them. Lord Neuberger declined to do so at [131]–[133] as a constitutional question for a nine-justice court.
Cases to cite	R (Keyu) v SSFCA [2015] UKSC 69 • Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC 39 • R v MOD ex p Smith [1996] QB 517 • R (SC) v SSWP [2021] UKSC 26


Q3c: Why did Lord Neuberger decline to replace irrationality with proportionality in Keyu? What does Lord Kerr say?
Lord Neuberger [131]–[133]	It would be a constitutional change of the first order to replace the Wednesbury test with proportionality across all judicial review cases. Such a change is not appropriate to be made by a five-justice panel on a case not specifically raising this question as the central issue. A nine-justice court, properly constituted and with full argument, would be required. Furthermore, even if desirable in principle, replacing irrationality risks making courts into second decision-makers — this threatens the separation of powers.
Lord Kerr [271]–[284]	Proportionality is analytically superior to Wednesbury: it is structured, transparent, and principled. Wednesbury's famous formulation ('so unreasonable that no reasonable authority...') is circular and unpredictable. The rule of law requires that all public decisions meet a standard of justification — why should that standard depend on whether a Convention right happens to be engaged? A unified proportionality test would give certainty and enhance accountability.
Current Position	English law retains the two-track system: proportionality (HRA/EU law cases); irrationality (common law JR). The UKSC has repeatedly declined to unify them — see also Pham v SSHD [2015] UKSC 19. Post-Brexit, the question becomes more pressing as EU law no longer mandates proportionality in domestic courts.
Cases to cite	R (Keyu) v SSFCA [2015] UKSC 69 • Pham v SSHD [2015] UKSC 19 • Associated Provincial Picture Houses v Wednesbury Corp [1948] 1 KB 223


Q4: Case Study: U3 — national security, SIAC, evaluative judgment, constitutional principles
What Was at Issue	Deprivation of British citizenship on national security grounds under s.40(2) British Nationality Act 1981. U3 (Shamima Begum) challenged the decision before SIAC. Core issues: the depth of scrutiny available to courts/SIAC when the executive invokes national security, and what 'evaluative judgment' deference means.
What is SIAC?	The Special Immigration Appeals Commission is a specialist tribunal established by the Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997. It hears immigration and nationality appeals in cases involving classified/closed material (national security intelligence). It can hear 'closed' evidence that is not disclosed to the applicant or their open lawyers. SIAC provides a form of judicial oversight of national security decisions that ordinary courts cannot provide, because it can engage with classified material.
Evaluative Judgment	Lord Reed in U3 uses this term for judgments that require the weighing of incommensurable values by a body with specialist expertise: assessing the credibility of intelligence, the gravity of a threat, the reliability of sources. Courts give significant deference to these judgments because (a) they lack access to the underlying intelligence; (b) the executive has specialist expertise; and (c) national security decisions carry democratic accountability.
Constitutional Principles	1. Separation of powers: national security is an area where the executive has primacy. 2. Democratic accountability: the executive (through Ministers) is accountable to Parliament for security decisions — courts cannot replicate this. 3. Rule of law: even national security decisions must be reviewable, but the scope of review is calibrated. SIAC provides the institutional mechanism for rights-compliant oversight of closed material.
Lock Critique	Lock (2021) argues that 'democratic accountability' as a basis for deference is weak in national security cases: Parliament cannot scrutinise closed intelligence. The accountability is therefore formal (Ministerial responsibility) rather than real (parliamentary scrutiny of the actual decision). This undermines the constitutional justification for deference in U3-type cases.
Cases to cite	U3 v SSHD [2025] UKSC 19 • Begum v SSHD [2021] UKSC 7 • R (Keyu) v SSFCA [2015] UKSC 69 • R (SC) v SSWP [2021] UKSC 26



PART D — QUICK COMPARISON: PROPORTIONALITY vs IRRATIONALITY

Feature	Proportionality	Irrationality (Wednesbury)
When it applies	HRA 1998 cases (ECHR rights engaged)	Non-HRA common law JR cases
Test structure	Four-stage (Michalak): aim → rational connection → necessity → fair balance	Single question: was the decision beyond the range of reasonable outcomes?
Who bears burden?	State must justify each stage	Claimant must show decision was beyond the range of rationality
Variable intensity?	Yes — MWRF in welfare/resource cases (SC); full proportionality in rights cases (Tigere majority)	Yes — 'anxious scrutiny' in fundamental rights cases (ex p Smith)
Merits substitution risk?	Higher — court asks if less restrictive means existed	Lower — court only asks if decision was within a reasonable range
Key cases	Tigere [2015], SC [2021], Michalak [2017]	Wednesbury [1948], CCSU [1985], Keyu [2015]
Academic critique	Too intensive — judges become policy-makers (Lord Sumption, Tigere)	Too deferential — no structured analysis, opaque (Lord Kerr, Keyu)
Post-Brexit position?	Retained in HRA cases; EU law no longer mandates it in domestic courts	Retained; question of whether proportionality will expand post-Brexit remains open


PART E — DEFERENCE SPECTRUM ACROSS CASES

Case	Test Applied	Level of Deference	Why?
Tigere [2015] — majority	Full proportionality (4-stage)	LOWER (less deferential)	Individual rights; not pure resource allocation; claimant had deep UK ties
Tigere [2015] — minority	MWRF	HIGHER (more deferential)	Welfare policy is Parliament's domain; court should not fashion eligibility criteria
SC [2021]	MWRF	HIGHER	Primary legislation; macro-economic welfare policy; Parliament has democratic accountability
Keyu [2015]	Irrationality (refused to unify)	HIGH (irrationality)	Non-HRA; constitutional change too significant; Lord Neuberger declines to expand proportionality
U3 [2025]	Calibrated deference	HIGHEST	National security; closed material; executive has specialist expertise; SIAC provides adequate oversight
McAleenon [2024]	Variable intensity	VARIABLE	Supervisory jurisdiction; intensity calibrated to context, rights engaged, and decision-maker's expertise


PART F — OSCOLA QUICK REFERENCE

Source	OSCOLA Citation
Michalak (2017)	Michalak v General Medical Council [2017] UKSC 71
McAleenon (2024)	In re McAleenon [2024] UKSC 31
Tigere (2015)	R (Tigere) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015] UKSC 57
SC (2021)	R (SC, CB and 8 children) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2021] UKSC 26
Keyu (2015)	R (Keyu) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2015] UKSC 69
U3 (2025)	U3 v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2025] UKSC 19; [2025] AC 1510
Wednesbury (1948)	Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223
Bank Mellat (2013)	Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC 39
CCSU (1985)	Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374
Lock (2021)	Daniella Lock, 'The Shamima Begum Case: Difficulties with democratic accountability as a justification for judicial deference in the national security context' UK Constitutional Law Blog (9 March 2021) <https://ukconstitutionallaw.org/2021/03/09/daniella-lock-the-shamima-begum-case-difficulties-with-democratic-accountability-as-a-justification-for-judicial-deference-in-the-national-security-context/> accessed [date]
Graham (2025)	Lewis Graham, 'The Supreme Court, Discrimination and Maximal Deference' Admin Court Blog (25 November 2025) <https://administrativecourtblog.wordpress.com/2025/11/20/the-supreme-court-discrimination-and-maximal-deference/> accessed [date]

OSCOLA note: For cases, cite: Party v Party [year] court number. For UKSC: [year] UKSC [number]. For journal articles: Author, 'title' (year) volume journal start-page. For blogs: Author, 'title' blog-name (date) <URL> accessed [date].
